foreign I think it's most dangerous if
someone's like okay I should be good
with other people's anger you shouldn't
if like you either are or you're not and
if you're not take care of yourself and
if you are greatly in just worry about
loving your own anger and all the rest
of it will take care of itself
welcome to the art of accomplishment
where we explore how deepening
connection with ourselves and others
leads to creating the life we want with
enjoyment and ease I'm Brett Kistler
here today with my co-host Joe Hudson
foreign
[Music]
it may be that the most misunderstood
and hated emotion in our society is
anger at some point in probably
everyone's life words spoken and anger
have cut us deep to the Bone actions
taken from a place of Rage have broken
relationships and door hinges and turned
families and societies against
themselves
but where would we be without our anger
and how can anger point to what we and
others love and care deeply about
what does anger look like when we allow
ourselves to feel it fully and cleanly
Welcome to our series on emotions and
the wisdom behind them
how are you doing today Joe I'm doing
well it's uh rainy spring day in Sonoma
County so Joe what makes us so afraid of
anger I think a lot of us have suffered
abuse through anger
right and I think a lot of us have
abused other people through anger
there's a time in like development where
you get so angry
that you've like lose control you do
something that you don't want to do you
say something that you don't want to say
and that often hurts other people and
often we are taught
pretty early on that getting angry can
get you what you want or can oppress you
if it's a power over Dynamic one
person's oppressed and one person is
apparently getting what they want
and so no matter which side you're on on
that there's a certain amount of shame
that goes along with it
you can't feel completely 100 good with
having oppress somebody and you can't
feel completely 100 good at being
oppressed
and so for all those reasons anger
this what I would call this very
beautiful amazing energy
gets tabooed it gets hated it gets
people are scared of it
and then it becomes this weapon and this
villain
and then the whole society kind of
points towards that anger is like an out
of controlledness or something and
they're not
they're not making the distinction
between the emotion of anger and
somebody using anger at somebody
using anger to manipulate
so what is what is that distinction then
between feeling
anger in a way that's not meant to
manipulate or control it's going and
getting angry say out in the woods it
would be a kind of a simplified example
of it another example is like you know
I'm I have this thing about cooking
breakfast
and my kids have this thing about like
waiting
unconsciously waiting for the moment
when like all the pancakes have to be
done at the right place and the eggs are
blah blah blah right so it's like that
moment of like okay I'm totally focused
and then that'll be the time my kids
might ask me for like three or four
things at the same time or my wife will
be like hey have you you know cut the
lawn or whatever and not that I've cut
the lawn in like decades or maybe ever
but um and so there's a story one time
that was happening and I was just so
frustrated
and I put down my spatula and I jumped
up and down I was like I'm angry I'm
angry I'm angry I'm angry
and my daughter who is
I know she was like 11 she looked at me
and she goes that was some pretty good
anger dad I was like ah thanks
that's what anger looks like when it's
not at somebody it's just you're just
angry you're just frustrated it just is
what it is
like God damn it kid stop talking to me
while I'm cooking dishes like I'm trying
to control them
right I'm using my anger to influence
them to scare them into submission yeah
and so yeah of course
you know if you get hacked out by a
sword enough you're going to dislike the
sword but then you don't get to use the
sword in the way that it's useful that
is constructive and beautiful so what is
what is the way that is constructive and
beautiful when
when you're feeling anger in the kitchen
with your kids anger for me nowadays
there's a couple things one is it shows
it shows that like there's something
that I care about if I'm angry about
something it means there's something
that I care about and that I love right
and so I'm in this particular case I
care that I'm like cooking for my kids
that I'm nurturing them that you know
it's like that I I'm taking my
responsibility as a dad seriously like
there's there's love and care there so
that's one of the things that teaches me
the second thing it teaches me is that I
have a boundary that's being crossed
there's a way in which I'm not taking
care of myself
right and so in that case with my kids
you know
there's probably three times that
they've tried to interrupt me before and
instead of saying hey sweetie I'm
cooking could I just have
you know time to concentrate and then we
can talk over breakfast I've instead
gone I should I should be okay with her
interrupting me I'd be a good dad if I
if she was interrupting me and I was
good with it why am I not patient why am
I so bothered by the fact that she's
interrupting me you know I did something
like that instead of taking care of
myself and saying oh hun I'd love to
talk to you about that but let's do it
over
let's do it over lunch
so that's a that's another thing so
there's a boundary that I
that that I'm not taking care of myself
and so that's the second indicator and
then the third indicator is that there's
something that I'm scared about
there's some way in which I'm scared
that I'm gonna like make a crap
breakfast and then everybody's gonna
make fun of me or whatever they're gonna
not want to eat it or you know I'm I'm
not gonna can't remember exactly a
circumstance at the time but maybe I was
scared that
I was gonna make more work for my wife
had already worked really hard that week
with the kids or whatever it was right
so that there's also a fear there
and so that's also a really good
indicator it's like what is it that I'm
that I feel scared right and and all
that together is like if you feel that
fear and you feel the care there's often
this feeling of trappedness that comes
along with it too which is like okay I'm
a bad dad if I don't get the pancakes
right
cook the things right a bad dad if I
don't answer their questions I can't
[__] win [__] you know it's like that
and so those are the indicators of what
the anger is and then so that really
allows you to open up the whole thing
but all of that is like this very
intellectual process
and in the case of this where you just
let the anger move for a moment yeah I'm
just so angry
and they're like that's good Angry Dad
like immediately I have connection again
and immediately I had clarity
and I remember after it was done I was
like yeah and then we all kind of
laughed and I said hey can you let me
Focus for a minute until breakfast is
ready they're like yeah
and that Clarity of action like this is
this is what I need to take care of
myself and you just do it
and anger just talks differently than
logic does you know logic talks like
actually all emotions probably talk
differently than logic does in the same
way
and logic is like a plus b equals c and
therefore a minus C equals B that's kind
of the logic system
whereas anger is more like
clarity
and so when you really allow the anger
to move through
without the resistance with the love you
you find these great moments of clarity
and empowerment you mentioned this thing
about how there's like damned if you do
damned if you don't thing where you feel
trapped between these two
and there's these two outcomes you want
to avoid being a bad dad in one way or
being a bad dad in another way
so like like anger seems to be something
that comes up when we feel trapped there
could be times that we are physically
trapped and we're angry but more often
than not we're just psychologically
trapped we're emotionally feeling
trapped
and so that that anger is our attempt
our determination to get out of that
trappedness
like that seems like a healthy impulse
to have how does that become Twisted
into something that's dangerous and
damaging it feels like there's a that's
a two-part question the first part of
your question is how does it
directly which is we then use the anger
to try to control others
but the the deeper question is like how
does that even get to the feeling of
trackness in the first place
and that's usually based on trauma right
it's usually based on
so for instance I would be a fine father
if I screwed up the pancakes and that'd
be a fine father if I showed frustration
at my kids right like none of those is
going to make me a bad father maybe
doing them over and over and over and
over and over and over again on purpose
or something would but
right so I'm not actually trapped
in that moment I'm not actually trapped
but I've convinced myself I am
and the reason that we convince
ourselves we're trapped when we're not
is often because of our childhood
right because in my childhood for
instance
if I didn't do something right I would
get yelled at so I'm trying not to get
yelled at so I feel trapped not because
I'm trapped in this particular day and
age I'm trapped because it reminds me of
a situation where I was trapped as a kid
so that's the other thing that happens
is that the feeling
oftentimes we're not angry at the
situation we're in we're angry
at a situation that we couldn't control
from our earlier Childhood Days
and Trauma
is basically the experience of being
in an old circumstance instead of the
circumstance you're currently in I.E
somebody who has PTSD thinking that
they're back in Iraq
when they're in the middle of Illinois
well you put yourself back into a
situation
that's not what's occurring today so
what makes us then so afraid of feeling
that anger yeah yeah what makes us
afraid of feeling it I think
generally with almost all these emotions
each one has their own particular thing
right but
with almost all negative emotions
um people feel they're scared of doing
it because they think it's going to make
it last forever
and then the other reason particularly
with anger is that people think they
will destroy things with anger right and
you can see some of the other traditions
where the
the angry entity the angry
expression of God whether it's you know
the Tibetan habit you know these angry
expressions of
the Divine and the Hindus have this
these angry Kali has these angry
expressions of the Divine there's this
understanding that the destruction and
rebirth is part of the natural cycle and
that anger is part of that destruction
and so
it's seen as kind of how things get
built is by allowing them to be
destroyed and that that conflict and the
friction is part of the rebuilding it's
part of the evolutionary process for
people
and the anger
felt when we get scared they were angry
is that we're going to destroy it we're
going to hurt somebody we're gonna
end a relationship but you know we're
not going to be loved anymore that's the
that's the fear
and and our brains you just watch it our
brains don't even notice in this moment
that there's another option it's like if
I I can't get angry
because I might destroy my friendship
but they it never thinks oh well just go
get angry somewhere else
oh
like what makes that happen if you
really think about that for a second
it's like so I'm mad at a friend and
then I tell myself well I can't get
angry at them because I might lose my
friendship with them
so I'll just go get angry somewhere else
nobody thinks that then it's like no
I'll just repress the anger
so what makes that so
it's because it's not really about this
fear of Destruction that's happening
it's really about the fear that I will
be destroyed by my own anger hmm
if I let anger out I might lose myself
in it maybe in the in the case of the
friend
the fear that we will lose the friend
because we know that if we draw the
boundary that we need to draw
we might lose the friend right but even
before the boundary even just like okay
let's say you've stolen something from
me and I'm upset with you and I'm like
well I can't get angry because then I
might lose him and you know it's only 20
bucks let's say
but I don't go okay well I'm just gonna
like go to the beach and just yell and
get really angry at Brett and then I'll
come back
you know it's just like what makes it
that we don't think that what makes it
that the only options are angry at the
person or repress the anger what limits
our thinking to that small instead of
I'm going to write something really
angry and then I'm going to burn it up
or I'm going to go to the beach and yell
or all sorts of ways that you can
express anger what makes it that we just
don't do any of that don't even think to
do any of those things yeah well
something that comes up for me is like
so many of us are never really alone in
the woods or alone on the beach or so
rarely in fact the time that we might be
alone might be when we're driving which
might explain how so much road rage
tends to come out when people feel alone
but they're actually interacting with
others between metal and glass
and that's a moment where they can a
rare moment where they can process their
anger without
scaring everybody around them or being
judged yeah as a matter of fact I have a
lot of my clients and they're like I
don't have a safe place to be angry I'm
like get in your car
do you like do it on your commute I had
this one um
executive that I worked with and she you
know when we first started working
together
she very much felt you know like a
victim like she didn't have control over
this big bureaucracy
I was like look here's the homework just
get angry every night on your commute
every night just get pissed at
everything that happened
that you want to get pissed at and
literally within like two or three weeks
her empowerment changed significantly
her level of empowerment changed
significantly she didn't feel as trapped
anymore and I would say like a kind of a
low-level Depression started changing
for her into much more empowerment and
I've seen that dozens of times
and yeah maybe if a car is the only
place you've got do the car if you know
one executive I worked with the other
day
went to the beach you know went right up
to the ocean and yelled at the ocean
nobody could hear you know in San
Francisco
there's always a way to do it and
there's always a reason not to because
our brain will find any way that it can
to not be angry if we were told as a kid
that anger was bad
or if we were punished for anger or if
we got to experience as someone's abuse
through anger
you know we'll just we'll shut it down
in us and ourselves and we'll suffer
depression because of it and will feel
like we're
like we can't make the moves that we
want to make we'll feel disempowered
because of it because we don't have
access to that beautiful energy of anger
in a way that's healthy and loving what
if somebody has just a lot of anger
built up and the drive home on a commute
isn't enough to release all of it so
it's just open to floodgates and the
moment they get home they're still angry
and take it out on their family keep
driving
keep driving
there's no yeah I find a different way
like walk in the door go oh [__] I'm
still angry hey guys look I'm really
angry right now I don't want to take it
out on any of you I'm gonna go drive and
yell for a couple 20 minutes and I'll be
back
all right I I can't imagine a husband or
a wife going no no no no no no
I need you to help cook they're gonna be
like great please don't get angry at us
thank you I don't know I could imagine
that I could also imagine somebody
seeing somebody being like I'm angry and
I need to go drive
think that they're being abandoned
by that
and try to stop it yeah I think I need
to go drive or I'll be back in 20
minutes I think is a huge difference
between the abandonment and
non-abandonment what I notice is that
when somebody's removing their love as a
form of punishment they don't give you a
timeline all right
yeah like hey Brett yeah I just can't be
around you goodbye or hey Brett I'm not
able to be with myself and right now in
a way that I want to be with you and so
give me 20 minutes I'll be back let's
start the conversation again
hugely different things yeah it's true
what do you think the repercussions of
having an episode on anger can you can
you yeah repercussions of having an
episode on anger is you know people
might feel permission to just start
abusing people in their lives with their
anger
um under the guise of
um just moving my anger right yeah so
for sure we're not recommending anywhere
that someone gets angry at another
person I think that's part of the shame
cycle that's part of the blame cycle and
it'll only make the anger more stuck so
but I think the real repercussion of
Anger of an anger episode or I think one
of the real repercussions is there's a
series of people out there who've really
been hurt by another person's anger
and they are going to be upset that
anybody is saying
that anger could be a beautiful and good
thing and most likely because they've
been hurt so bad by anger that they're
not going to be aggressive about it
they'll be passive aggressive about it
and so the most likely thing that we'll
get is
you know a series of subtle passive
aggressive attacks you know built under
like I don't feel safe with this episode
or
you know some way of demeaning the
conversation through a passive
aggression I think that's like the most
likely scenario for an episode on anger
or perhaps somebody blaming the episode
on anger for
somebody listening to it and then taking
anger out on them yeah that could happen
as well yeah yeah
and again we're not recommending anybody
take anger out at anybody right
that's just resisted anger
it's like we're talking about loving
your anger we're talking about letting
it move letting it
get out
we're talking about learning to have
anger unresisted instead of being
lost in your anger yeah so like
something that we're pointing to right
now is like I've I've been feeling a
little bit off in this episode talking
about anger because anger is so
uncomfortable to talk about or like to
bring into
like a conversation and it's so deeply
patterned in my system that even right
now recording this episode I'm like oh
my God people are going to get angry at
me people are going to get angry at us
um they're gonna take it out on us it's
actually been blocking my clarity and my
Wonder in this conversation
yeah which is a really just interesting
observation
for myself yeah I I get you know having
done uh back in the day these workshops
these live workshops there was always
somebody who would get angry at me in
the middle of the workshop and I was
really good when somebody was just like
outright angry right they'd be like and
I'd be like yeah tell me about it like
please I want to hear it what's the
wisdom in your anger what do you care
about that's making you like this like I
want to respect that and then get angry
and then they would see that they were
met and like it would all be done but
the ones that trap me especially early
on were the passive aggressive ones the
ones where the aggression was done
through the idea of safety or you know
we didn't make introductions and so I
don't feel safe and you know it was that
way it was hard for me to learn how to
deal with that because there was just
kind of this subtle attack that wasn't
being acknowledged as an attack
and it would undermine the group you
know undermine everybody else's ability
to get things done and to learn what
they were there to learn and what I
learned was to just say hey great
I really hear that you're upset with
something I've done can you help me by
just being really just direct and angry
with me about it just as an experiment
like just instead of being passive
aggressive be aggressive aggressive
and as soon as I learned that you know
and if they were game they would do that
and then they would have this big smile
on their face and I'd have a big smile
on their face and they would feel the
freedom of actually getting in touch
with their anger
um it was a whole different thing but it
it messed with me because it you know at
some point in in that process I was like
oh I hope I don't have somebody who's
doing that passive aggressive thing
you know it dismissed me because I was a
white man or dismissed me because
I
was a venture capitalist at some point
or whatever dismissed me because I swore
too much whatever it was right and
and yeah it's a it's a challenge to
learn how to love people's anger in both
the aggressive and the passive
aggressive forms
it's a challenge and it's so rewarding
there's a component of that that's
learning to love the anger but then
there's also a component of being okay
with
feeling the fear of
you know somebody undermining the entire
group so it seems like there's two
things here there is
welcoming and becoming more and more
okay with our anger so that we can be
with people in their anger and
comfortable with that yes um and then
there's also the
like attenuating the fear response to
anger the threatened feeling right the
threatened feeling or the trauma and
that can take time and be patient with
yourself and draw good boundaries
I think it's most dangerous if someone's
like okay I should be good with other
people's anger you shouldn't if like you
either are or you're not and if you're
not take care of yourself and if you are
great lean in yeah just worry about
loving your own anger and all the rest
of it will take care of itself yeah it
seems like the being the shooting
oneself
to be okay with someone else's anger
could easily put you in a position where
you're putting yourself in a position to
receive more anger than your nervous
system can handle correct that's right
which will then make you respond in ways
that you didn't want to respond correct
yeah if your system goes into freeze if
you are unable to maintain love
draw a boundary remove yourself
and learn and learn to love your own
anger and it'll all work out but there's
no rush in any of this
it's not your job to love anybody's
anger it's your job to love yourself
all the aspects of you so Joe what do
you think given that we have so much
anger coming up in our society right now
what do you think society would look
like
if everybody was doing this if everybody
had at some stage where people are
welcoming each other's anger and
welcoming their own anger and drawing
the boundary and removing themselves
from a situation so that they can feel
it and process it
in a safe place like what would that
look like far more peaceful far more
loving
let's like look at a political debate
for a second if
somebody on one side of the fence as if
there were a fence as if there was a
side
but one person on one side of the fence
is really emotional really upset and
really getting angry over something that
somebody on the other side of the fence
did
and it's not this manipulative at anger
at anything right like like you see the
pundits do
and you have this anger and you and that
they were met with love
yeah how does that change
how does it change like yeah I see that
there's something really important here
that you care about
I mean the crazy thing is on both sides
of the political Spectrum on both sides
is that people feel stuck and trapped in
a country that they don't want to be a
part of anymore
and they don't feel like they can do
anything about it
so we're incredibly unified in this way
we all agree we all agree that the
country is in the country that we want
exactly and
that we want it to change and we feel
frustrated that we can't get it to
change
but don't care what side of the spectrum
you're on and if we can love and accept
that in each other and if we can let the
anger Express in a way that's not
controlling anybody that's not shame
based or blame based then our society
has a determination to shift
and that's what you see like countries
that are on their way up are countries
who believe and understand that they
have the capacity to change
and then they have the capacity to grow
and they have the capacity to become
more powerful and
there's very few people in our country
that believe that anymore
almost everybody in our country seems to
suffer under the delusion that
Society is in a place where nothing can
be done to make it better
it's like a taunt apathy
and of course that makes you angry if
you believe that how could it not
something you care about so much like
your children
your friends your family your country
all being stuck into a situation that
that is no good for anybody
yeah of course How would how could you
not be angry does it really matter what
side you're angry at of course you're
going to be angry
right it seems like there's the sort of
the Paradox there is that a society that
is suppressing its anger is becoming
more and more angry and dangerous ways
yeah and a society that doesn't suppress
its anger
is just determined yeah most societies I
see kind of repress their anger not all
but most suppress their anger but they
they have better or worse outlets for
the anger
you know it's no mistake that as all of
our outlets for anger whether it be gyms
or
sports games or
got taken away from us during covid that
it started manifesting in
other ways the anger has to get out it's
gonna get out
the question is like how does it how
does that get manifested in a way that's
healthy how do you do it in a way that's
respectful and loving and not at anybody
so this was a lot of really good
intellectual discussion and I'm curious
if you have any any questions for our
audience to sit with after this episode
yeah I have three the first one is
um
what's necessary for you to express your
anger
without hurting anybody or doing it at
anybody
what would it take for you to feel safe
doing that
and then another question I would ask is
how can you love your anger
unconditionally how can you love your
anger the same way that you wish to love
the kids that you have or the kids that
you hope to have
and
the last question I would put out is
what would it take for you to never get
angry at somebody again
and to allow yourself to be angry
whenever you were
oh yeah it's does sound very interesting
to sit with thank you Joe you're welcome
Brett it's a pleasure to be with you
again as always
thanks for listening to the art of
accomplishment if you enjoyed what you
heard today please subscribe and rate US
on your podcast app we'd love your
feedback so feel free to send us
questions or comments you can reach out
to us join our newsletter or check out
our courses at Art of accomplishment.com
thank you